\documentclass[]{article}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\usepackage{fixltx2e} % provides \textsubscript
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\else % if luatex or xelatex
  \ifxetex
    \usepackage{mathspec}
    \usepackage{xltxtra,xunicode}
  \else
    \usepackage{fontspec}
  \fi
  \defaultfontfeatures{Mapping=tex-text,Scale=MatchLowercase}
  \newcommand{\euro}{â‚¬}
\fi
% use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
% use microtype if available
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{%
\usepackage{microtype}
\UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\usepackage{longtable,booktabs}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
\ifxetex
  \usepackage[setpagesize=false, % page size defined by xetex
              unicode=false, % unicode breaks when used with xetex
              xetex]{hyperref}
\else
  \usepackage[unicode=true]{hyperref}
\fi
\hypersetup{breaklinks=true,
            bookmarks=true,
            pdfauthor={},
            pdftitle={Immigration attitudes: the role of economic and cultural threat},
            colorlinks=true,
            citecolor=blue,
            urlcolor=blue,
            linkcolor=magenta,
            pdfborder={0 0 0}}
\urlstyle{same}  % don't use monospace font for urls
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
\setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em}  % prevent overfull lines
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{0}

%%% Use protect on footnotes to avoid problems with footnotes in titles
\let\rmarkdownfootnote\footnote%
\def\footnote{\protect\rmarkdownfootnote}

%%% Change title format to be more compact
\usepackage{titling}

% Create subtitle command for use in maketitle
\newcommand{\subtitle}[1]{
  \posttitle{
    \begin{center}\large#1\end{center}
    }
}

\setlength{\droptitle}{-2em}

  \title{Immigration attitudes: the role of economic and cultural threat}
    \pretitle{\vspace{\droptitle}\centering\huge}
  \posttitle{\par}
    \author{}
    \preauthor{}\postauthor{}
    \date{}
    \predate{}\postdate{}
  

\begin{document}

\maketitle


Why do the majority of voters in the U.S. and other developed countries
oppose increased immigration? According to the conventional wisdom and
many economic theories, people simply do not want to face additional
competition on the labor market (\emph{economic threat} hypothesis).
Nonetheless, most comprehensive empirical tests have failed to confirm
this hypothesis and it appears that people often support policies that
are against their personal economic interest. At the same time, there
has been growing evidence that immigration attitudes are rather
influenced by various deep-rooted ethnic and cultural stereotypes
(\emph{cultural threat} hypothesis). Given the prominence of workers'
economic concerns in the political discourse, how can these findings be
reconciled?

This exercise is based in part on Malhotra, N., Margalit, Y. and Mo,
C.H., 2013. ``\href{https://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12012}{Economic
Explanations for Opposition to Immigration: Distinguishing between
Prevalence and Conditional Impact}.'' \emph{American Journal of
Political Science}, Vol. 38, No. 3, pp.~393-433.

The authors argue that, while job competition is not a prevalent threat
and therefore may not be detected by aggregating survey responses, its
\emph{conditional} impact in selected industries may be quite sizable.
To test their hypothesis, they conduct a unique survey of Americans'
attitudes toward H-1B visas. The plurality of H-1B visas are occupied by
Indian immigrants, who are skilled but ethnically distinct, which
enables the authors to measure a specific skill set (high technology)
that is threatened by a particular type of immigrant (H-1B visa
holders). The data set \texttt{immig.csv} has the following variables:

\begin{longtable}[c]{@{}ll@{}}
\toprule\addlinespace
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.35\columnwidth}\raggedright
Name
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.58\columnwidth}\raggedright
Description
\end{minipage}
\\\addlinespace
\midrule\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.35\columnwidth}\raggedright
\texttt{age}
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.58\columnwidth}\raggedright
Age (in years)
\end{minipage}
\\\addlinespace
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.35\columnwidth}\raggedright
\texttt{female}
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.58\columnwidth}\raggedright
\texttt{1} indicates female; \texttt{0} indicates male
\end{minipage}
\\\addlinespace
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.35\columnwidth}\raggedright
\texttt{employed}
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.58\columnwidth}\raggedright
\texttt{1} indicates employed; \texttt{0} indicates unemployed
\end{minipage}
\\\addlinespace
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.35\columnwidth}\raggedright
\texttt{nontech.whitcol}
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.58\columnwidth}\raggedright
\texttt{1} indicates non-tech white-collar work (e.g., law)
\end{minipage}
\\\addlinespace
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.35\columnwidth}\raggedright
\texttt{tech.whitcol}
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.58\columnwidth}\raggedright
\texttt{1} indicates high-technology work
\end{minipage}
\\\addlinespace
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.35\columnwidth}\raggedright
\texttt{expl.prejud}
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.58\columnwidth}\raggedright
Explicit negative stereotypes about Indians (continuous scale, 0-1)
\end{minipage}
\\\addlinespace
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.35\columnwidth}\raggedright
\texttt{impl.prejud}
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.58\columnwidth}\raggedright
Implicit bias against Indian Americans (continuous scale, 0-1)
\end{minipage}
\\\addlinespace
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.35\columnwidth}\raggedright
\texttt{h1bvis.supp}
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.58\columnwidth}\raggedright
Support for increasing H-1B visas (5-point scale, 0-1)
\end{minipage}
\\\addlinespace
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.35\columnwidth}\raggedright
\texttt{indimm.supp}
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.58\columnwidth}\raggedright
Support for increasing Indian immigration (5-point scale, 0-1)
\end{minipage}
\\\addlinespace
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

The main outcome of interest (\texttt{h1bvis.supp}) was measured as a
following survey item: ``Some people have proposed that the U.S.
government should increase the number of H-1B visas, which are
allowances for U.S. companies to hire workers from foreign countries to
work in highly skilled occupations (such as engineering, computer
programming, and high-technology). Do you think the U.S. should
increase, decrease, or keep about the same number of H-1B visas?''
Another outcome (\texttt{indimm.supp}) similarly asked about the ``the
number of immigrants from India.'' Both variables have the following
response options: \texttt{0} = ``decrease a great deal'', \texttt{0.25}
= ``decrease a little'', \texttt{0.5} = ``keep about the same'',
\texttt{0.75} = ``increase a little'', \texttt{1} = ``increase a great
deal''.

To measure explicit stereotypes (\texttt{expl.prejud}), respondents were
asked to evaluate Indians on a series of traits: capable, polite,
hardworking, hygienic, and trustworthy. All responses were then used to
create a scale lying between \texttt{0} (only positive traits of
Indians) to \texttt{1} (no positive traits of Indians). Implicit bias
(\texttt{impl.prejud}) is measured via the \emph{Implicit Association
Test} (IAT) which is an experimental method designed to gauge the
strength of associations linking social categories (e.g., European vs
Indian American) to evaluative anchors (e.g., good vs bad). Individual
who are prejudiced against Indians should be quicker at making
classifications of faces and words when \emph{European American}
(\emph{Indian American}) is paired with \emph{good} (\emph{bad}) than
when \emph{European American} (\emph{Indian American}) is paired with
\emph{bad} (\emph{good}). If you want, you can test yourself
\href{https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit/takeatest.html}{here}.

\subsection{Question 1}\label{question-1}

Start by examining the distribution of immigration attitudes (as factor
variables). What is the proportion of people who are willing to increase
the quota for high-skilled foreign professionals (\texttt{h1bvis.supp})
or support immigration from India (\texttt{indimm.supp})?

Now compare the distribution of two distinct measures of cultural
threat: explicit stereotyping about Indians (\texttt{expl.prejud}) and
implicit bias against Indian Americans (\texttt{impl.prejud}). In
particular, create a scatterplot, add a linear regression line to it,
and calculate the correlation coefficient. Based on these results, what
can you say about their relationship?

\subsection{Question 2}\label{question-2}

Compute the correlations between all four policy attitude and cultural
threat measures. Do you agree that cultural threat is an important
predictor of immigration attitudes as claimed in the literature?

If the labor market hypothesis is correct, opposition to H-1B visas
should also be more pronounced among those who are economically
threatened by this policy such as individuals in the high-technology
sector. At the same time, tech workers should not be more or less
opposed to general Indian immigration because of any \emph{economic}
considerations. First, regress H-1B and Indian immigration attitudes on
the indicator variable for tech workers (\texttt{tech.whitcol}). Do the
results support the hypothesis? Is the relationship different from the
one involving cultural threat and, if so, how?

\subsection{Question 3}\label{question-3}

When examining hypotheses, it is always important to have an appropriate
comparison group. One may argue that comparing tech workers to everybody
else as we did in Question 2 may be problematic due to a variety of
confounding variables (such as skill level and employment status).
First, create a single factor variable \texttt{group} which takes a
value of \texttt{tech} if someone is employed in tech,
\texttt{whitecollar} if someone is employed in other ``white-collar''
jobs (such as law or finance), \texttt{other} if someone is employed in
any other sector, and \texttt{unemployed} if someone is unemployed.
Then, compare the support for H-1B across these conditions by using the
linear regression. Interpret the results: is this comparison more or
less supportive of the labor market hypothesis than the one in Question
2?

Now, one may also argue that those who work in the tech sector are
disproportionately young and male which may confound our results. To
account for this possibility, fit another linear regression but also
include \texttt{age} and \texttt{female} as pre-treatment covariates (in
addition to \texttt{group}). Does it change the results and, if so, how?

Finally, fit a linear regression model with all threat indicators
(\texttt{group}, \texttt{expl.prejud}, \texttt{impl.prejud}) and
calculate its $R^2$. How much of the variation is explained? Based on
the model fit, what can you conclude about the role of threat factors?

\subsection{Question 4}\label{question-4}

Besides economic and cultural threat, many scholars also argue that
gender is an important predictor of immigration attitudes. While there
is some evidence that women are slightly less opposed to immigration
than men, it may also be true that gender conditions the very effect of
other factors such as cultural threat. To see if it is indeed the case,
fit a linear regression of H-1B support on the interaction between
gender and implicit prejudice. Then, create a plot with the predicted
level of H-1B support (y-axis) across the range of implicit bias
(x-axis) by gender. Considering the results, would you agree that gender
alters the relationship between cultural threat and immigration
attitudes?

Age is another important covariate. Fit two regression models in which
H-1B support is either a linear or quadratic function of age. Compare
the results by plotting the predicted levels of support (y-axis) across
the whole age range (x-axis). Would you say that people become more
opposed to immigration with age?

\subsection{Question 5 (Optional)}\label{question-5-optional}

To corroborate your conclusions with regard to cultural threat, create
separate binary variables for both prejudice indicators based on their
median value (\texttt{1} if \texttt{\textgreater{}} than the median) and
then compare average H-1B and Indian immigration attitudes (as numeric
variables) depending on whether someone is implicitly or explicitly
prejudiced (or both). What do these comparisons say about the role of
cultural threat?

What about the role of economic threat? One may argue that tech workers
are simply more or less prejudiced against Indians than others. To
account for this possibility, investigate whether economic threat is in
fact distinguishable from cultural threat as defined in the study. In
particular, compare the distribution of cultural threat indicator
variable using the Q-Q plot depending on whether someone is in the
high-technology sector. Would you conclude that cultural and economic
threat are really distinct?

\end{document}
